JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is on
assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
death toll rises in South
Carolina, as new flooding
dangers
emerge.
Then: The top U.S. commander in
Afghanistan calls the airstrike
on a hospital a mistake.
Plus: Ann Romney on her new
memoir about living with M.S.
and a forecast about the
presidential
campaign.
ANN ROMNEY, Author, "In This
Together: My Story": This
sentiment is not only out there.
I think it's real, and I think
that politicians are better --
obviously, they're turning to
people outside of the norm to
say, you go in there with a
wrecking ball and just -- just
smash it all to pieces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The sun came out
today in South Carolina after
days of a deluge triggered
historic flooding. But the death
toll rose again to 15. More than
75 miles of Interstate
95 remained closed, and
officials warned there's more
flooding to come.
William Brangham
has our coverage.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The rain has
finally stopped, but waterways
around Columbia, the state
capital,
were still swelling today.
MAN: This residential section,
it is populated with a lot of
different ponds and large lakes,
and, so, unfortunately, all of
them have overfilled the banks.
They have wrecked the dams. They
have ruined all the bridges. And
as you see now, this one lake
behind us has already gone
from being topping over the top
of this bridge to where now it's
emptying out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To the
southeast, in the nearly cut-off
town of Manning, the water
was chest-high in Ashley
Perillo's (ph) house.
ASHLEY PERILLO, Flood Victim:
This is all we own. What we got
on us now is all we own.
Our kids only got one outfit
on their body right now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Manning is one
of the many places getting
inundated for a second time,
as runoff from higher
elevations heads for the coast.
Governor Nikki Haley warned
today, that means, even as parts
of the state start drying out,
others still face danger.
GOV. NIKKI HALEY (R), South
Carolina: The Midlands, now all
that water is going to start
moving down to the low country.
And so we are going to be
extremely careful. We are
watching this minute by minute.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Haley said the
towns of Orangeburg, Conway,
Georgetown, and Jamestown
are prime candidates to face the
flood threat in coming days.
Meanwhile, for hundreds of
people, home is a
school gymnasium.
WOMAN: I just grabbed my
grandkids and left everything
and just came onto the school
and
just started praying. That's all
I did. I just started praying.
And I said, lord, just
take care of us. And he did.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Red Cross
has 26 shelters operating
statewide, including this one at
A.C. Flora High School in
Columbia with cots for about 200
people.
ANTHONY TORNETTA, American Red
Cross: This is a safe place for
them to come, get out
of the weather. Temperatures are
starting to drop. It's
nightfall. This is an
opportunity
for them to get warm, get some
food, regroup, recover, and
think about what next steps are.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Back in
Columbia, the next steps for
more than 1,100 National
Guardsmen
and others involve working to
shore up dams and repair
breached levees. Today, crews
used
heavy machinery to deliver
massive sandbags in a bid to
keep the water at bay.
I'm William Brangham for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Utilities are
also trying to restore safe
drinking water for some 400,000
customers around Columbia.
In the day's other news, the
head of NATO stepped up his war
of words with Russia for
violating Turkey's airspace.
Russia maintains that its planes
twice strayed into Turkey
accidentally, as they were
on bombing runs in Syria.
But, in Brussels, NATO's chief
rejected that explanation, and
charged that Russia's actions
are -- quote -- "unacceptable."
JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General: This is a
serious violation of the
airspace.
And, actually, there were two
violations during the weekend.
So, that just adds to the fact
that this doesn't look
like an accident.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
Russians said their latest
targets were towns in northern
Aleppo province that are under
Islamic State control, as well
as militant bases in Palmyra.
Turkey is warning that three
million more refugees could flee
the fighting in Syria.
The new estimate came today at a
meeting of European officials in
Brussels. E.U. nations,
in turn, offered Turkey more
than $1 billion in aid, plus
other incentives, in a bid to
stem the flow.
The European Union's highest
court has handed privacy
advocates a major victory.
Today's
decision struck down an
agreement that lets Facebook and
others transfer consumer
information
to the U.S. unimpeded. The court
said revelations about U.S.
surveillance shows the
information
is not being adequately
protected, and European
officials echoed the point.
HEIKO MAAS, German Minister of
Justice and Consumer Protection
(through translator):
The verdict of the European
Court of Justice is a strong
signal for more data protection
and greater protection of
privacy in a globally
interconnected world. That will
only be possible
if the data of European users
which is saved in the U.S. is
better protected in future
than before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The ruling could
make it far more difficult for
thousands of companies
to do business, in the face
of consumer complaints.
A Chicago company could face a
record fine, nearly $2 million,
for flying drones in Chicago
and New York without permission.
The Federal Aviation
Administration proposed the
penalty
today for SkyPan International.
The FAA says the aerial
photography company made dozens
of drone flights into restricted
airspace over nearly three
years.
Scientists from Canada and Japan
have won this year's Nobel Prize
for Physics for explaining
how neutrinos fit into the
universe. Working separately,
Arthur McDonald and Takaaki
Kajita
proved the subatomic particles
have mass. In Tokyo today,
Kajita said the research is
just one small step toward
understanding the complexities
of the cosmos.
TAKAAKI KAJITA, Nobel Prize
Winner (through translator): The
universe we live in is filled
with things that have yet to be
discovered. Such enormous
questions are not resolved in
research that is done in a
matter of one day or two days,
but it takes many people getting
involved over the course of many
years to unravel the mystery.
So, I really hope young
people will participate in
solving these mysteries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Most neutrinos
that reach Earth were created by
nuclear reactions inside the
sun, and trillions of them pass
through the human body every
second.
There's word the Obama
administration deported fewer
immigrants over the past year
than at
any time since 2006. The
Associated Press reports that
231,000 people were sent home
in the 12 months that ended in
September. That doesn't include
Mexicans who were caught
at the border and
quickly returned.
This was a lackluster day on
Wall Street. The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 13
points to close at 16790. The
Nasdaq fell nearly 33 points,
and the S&P 500 lost seven.
And, horror of horrors, pumpkin
pie could be in short supply
come Thanksgiving. Crop
experts in Illinois say record
rain in June washed out crops in
the state that grows 90
percent of U.S. pumpkins. They
say there should be enough
jack-o'-lanterns for Halloween,
but canned pumpkin is liable to
run low before Thanksgiving.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the top U.S. commander in
Afghanistan comes under fire
for a mistaken airstrike; the
6,000 inmates that the
Department of Justice is aiming
to
release from prison early; Ann
Romney on her new memoir and
today's politics; a conversation
with the Dalai Lama,
and much more.
The top U.S. military commander
in Afghanistan went before the
Senate Armed Services Committee
today and recommended altering
the plan to withdraw American
troops in that country.
He also shed more light on the
deadly incident earlier this
week in which a civilian
hospital
was mistakenly attacked
by U.S. aircraft.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL, Commander of
U.S. Forces in Afghanistan: To
be clear, the decision
to was a U.S. decision made
within the U.S. chain of
command. A hospital was
mistakenly
struck.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That mistake
killed at least 22 people Friday
in Kunduz. Today, General
John Campbell, facing committee
chair Senator John McCain
acknowledged it was an American
decision to strike.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: The Afghan
forces on the ground requested
air support from our forces
that are on the ground. Even
though the Afghans request that
support, it still has to go
through
a rigorous U.S. procedure to
enable fires to go on the
ground.
SEN. JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona:
But there was no forward air
controllers, American forward
air controllers on the ground?
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: Sir, we had
a special operations unit that
was in close vicinity
that was talking to the aircraft
that delivered those fires.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Initial accounts
had said the AC-130 gunship
fired in support of the American
troops. The evolving story has
led Doctors Without Borders to
demand a fully independent
investigation.
New Hampshire Democrat
Jeanne Shaheen:
SEN. JEANNE SHAHEEN (D), New
Hampshire: Do you have any
reason to object to having an
independent investigation done
by the U.N. or another
independent body of what
happened?
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: Ma'am, I
have trust and confidence in the
folks that will do the
investigation
for NATO, the folks that will do
the investigation for DOD and
the Afghan partners. And so, you
know, all the very, very tough
questions that we're all asking,
they will get after that.
SEN. JEANNE SHAHEEN: But, as I
understand your answer, then,
you wouldn't object to
and would cooperate with
an independent body?
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: I would let
my higher headquarters or senior
personnel make that
decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, the White
House announced the Justice
Department is also
investigating.
The airstrikes at Kunduz came
amid a pitched battle to retake
the city, the first one captured
by the Taliban since 2001.
Campbell said, given the Taliban
surge and the Islamic State's
entry into Afghanistan, he's
proposing extending the U.S.
presence beyond what the
president
outlined 16 months ago.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: By the end of
2016, our military will draw
down to a normal embassy
presence in Kabul, with a
security assistance component,
just
as we have done in Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That deadline was
mentioned repeatedly today,
ruefully by some.
SEN. JOHN MCCAIN: I'm not making
this up, as he said, just as we
have done in Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reports last
night said the Obama White House
is now considering a force
of 5,000 troops, as Maine
independent Angus King noted.
SEN. ANGUS KING (I), Maine: In
your professional military
judgment, conditions on the
ground
at the present time would
require some revision of the
withdrawal plan to a
Kabul-centric
1,000 personnel by the end
of 2016. Is that correct?
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: The options
I provided provide pros and cons
of different levels
of support above and
beyond the 1,000.
SEN. ANGUS KING: But I'm not
asking you what you recommended.
I'm asking you for your
professional
judgment as you're sitting here
today that there should be some
revision to that plan.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL: Yes, sir.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There is no
timetable on when that decision
will be made.
And we take a closer look at the
future role of the U.S. in
Afghanistan with retired Army
Lieutenant General David Barno.
He served as a commander of U.S.
and coalition forces
in Afghanistan. He now teaches
at American University. And
Scott Smith, he is director
of the Afghanistan and Central
Asia Program at the United
States Institute of Peace. For
over a decade, he worked for the
United Nations, where he focused
on Afghanistan.
And we welcome you
both to the program.
General Barno, I'm going
to begin with you.
What more can you add to what
the U.S. military officials are
now saying was a mistake in
this strike on the
hospital in Kunduz?
LT. GEN. DAVID BARNO (RET.),
U.S. Army: Well, I think we have
seen the story evolve over
the last several days, which
is totally unsurprising to me.
This incident happened in the
middle of the night at about
2:00 in the morning on early
Saturday morning. It involved a
U.S. aircraft, an AC-130 Spectre
gunship, which typically
fly several thousand feet in the
air, striking a target that
later turned out to be the
Medecins
Sans Frontieres
hospital in Kunduz.
And we have also found out now
that there was a special forces
team, an American special
forces team, on the ground
nearby that was talking to the
aircraft. And I think all of
this is indicative of fog of war
and a big fight for Kunduz
that's been raging for the
last week.
And I'm very, very unsurprised
to find out that the situation
is continuing to evolve.
And I am encouraged to see there
will be at least three
investigations that we know of
right now to take a look at
this. This is not unusual in
Afghanistan. I tragically saw
some of these incidents occur
when I was the commander there.
And it always is tragic. It's
always disastrous to our efforts
in many ways there. And the
investigations find new ways to
prevent these from happening,
but, inevitably, in these
type of wars, especially when
we're in close civilian areas,
we are going to see these
kind of accidents occur.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scott Smith,
there's a lot of outrage over
this. Is that appropriate,
I mean, given what the
general is explaining here?
SCOTT SMITH, United States
Institute of Peace: Appropriate
or not, it's not an unexpected
emotion to come out of it.
I think what the MSF people
are saying is that...
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is the
Doctors Without Borders.
SCOTT SMITH: Doctors -- sorry,
the French acronym for Doctors
Without Borders.
That there was repeated fire
every 15 minutes over an hour
after they were calling to say,
look it, you're hitting a
hospital right now. Who knows
what the truth is? We will have
to see what the investigation
comes -- investigations comes
out with, what witnesses on the
ground
say.
But it's unfortunate. As General
Barno said, it's not uncommon,
but it is definitely
unfortunate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: General Barno, we
noticed that Afghan President
Ghani doesn't seem to be
as critical as typically
President Karzai has been in the
past of the United States.
How do you explain that?
LT. GEN. DAVID BARNO: Well, this
is a big change. And I think
it's a welcome one for
the United States and
for our NATO allies.
President Karzai over his
12-plus years in office became
more and more frustrated with
the coalition military presence
and was very, very forceful in
his response to these kinds
of incidents.
And I think President Ghani, who
realizes that President Obama
here in the United States
is about to make a critical
decision about keeping American
forces in Afghanistan or
drawing them down to only
several hundred, President Ghani
is a little bit more cautious.
He's been more reserved.
And I think he and many of his
senior officials have already
come out to say this is tragic,
but we understand how this can
happen and we look forward to
the results of the
investigation.
His response has been very
muted, and I think that's been
appropriate, given the
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scott Smith,
let's broaden this out and talk
about the -- what the Taliban
actually did in there in Kunduz.
How significant that they were
able to make their first
takeover of a major city in,
what,
14, 15 years?
SCOTT SMITH: I think
it's very significant.
First of all, it is first city
which has fallen, and Kunduz was
also the last city that fell
to -- the last Taliban-occupied
city that fell to American
troops in 2001, so there's
sort of a symbolic
dimension to this.
Secondly, the fact that, from
what my sources on the ground
are saying, the government has
not taken it back -- they have
taken part of it back, but
there's still fighting, and
it's not just booby traps. But
there is actually still some
resistance in the
street-to-street
fighting.
Third, the Taliban has opened up
fighting in other parts of the
north. There have been
three other provincial capitals
that have also been under
attack. So, this is not only
about Kunduz. It's about the
wider northern area where,
remember, so far up to now, they
haven't had a very
significant toehold.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, General
Barno, what is your sense of
where things stand then in
Afghanistan
right now?
LT. GEN. DAVID BARNO: Well, I
would reinforce those points.
This is of very deep concern,
the fact that the Taliban are
this active and this aggressive
now in Northern Afghanistan,
which for almost a decade has
been the most quiet part of
Afghanistan in terms of
insurgent
activity.
We have always worried about the
southern part of Afghanistan,
around Kandahar. We have
worried about the east around
Jalalabad. Those have been
hotbeds of Taliban activity
really
since the middle of the last
decade. This is a new, very
unwelcome phenomenon. They're
deeply entrenched in the north
now. And that should give us
great cause for concern.
And it certainly is going to
influence President Obama's
decision, in my judgment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about that, General Barno. I
mean, if the situation
is that unstable and that
concerning, is keeping another
5,000 troops going to make a
difference,
if that's what the
president decides to do?
LT. GEN. DAVID BARNO: I think
it will make a big difference.
And I think the fact that, if
you were to go down to several
hundred, the Afghan security
forces, the Afghan army would
lose all of its connection to
things like American firepower,
American logistics, American
trainers and advice. And that's
crucial to keep them in
the battle right now
against the Taliban.
If we take that out, I think
their ability to continue to go
toe to toe with the Taliban
will diminish very, very
rapidly. And they have been in
this fight. They're not running
away from the Taliban. They're
in the fight in all of these
cities. So, that's encouraging.
But if we take American troops
down to just a few that are
around the embassy in Kabul,
I think that is going
to be put at deep risk.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Scott Smith,
it sounds like the U.S. needs to
remain there -- at
least the general is saying that
-- to stiffen the spine and
provide other support for the
Afghan forces.
SCOTT SMITH: And I agree.
Part of it is all of the
elements that General Barno
mentioned, the financial
support, the
continuing training support,
airpower, which we have seen has
been something which they
had last year and has
been taken away.
There's also a big psychological
dimension to this. Afghans feel
they're about to be
abandoned again by the West, as
they were in 1992. And I think,
if this decision is
going to be taken, and I think
it probably will be taken, to
stay -- keep more troops
in there longer than originally
anticipated, I wish it had been
taken earlier, because
then it would have been seen as
part of a contribution to our
strategic partnership
with the Afghans.
Now it looks like it's in
reaction to the loss of Kunduz,
and therefore kind of more
of a panicked reaction, even
though this discussion has been
under way for at least a year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, so many
questions raised about this.
For now, though, we want
to thank both of you.
General David Barno, retired
general, thank you.
And, Scott Smith, we thank you.
SCOTT SMITH: Thank you.
LT. GEN. DAVID BARNO:
Thanks very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the largest
ever one-time release of federal
prisoners, the Justice
Department announced today a
plan to set free some 6,000
inmates.
Jeffrey Brown looks at that.
It's part of our ongoing series
Broken Justice on efforts
to address mass
incarceration in the U.S.
JEFFREY BROWN: The move is aimed
at nonviolent drug offenders,
and it's part of a broader
push on a number of fronts to
provide relief to individuals
hit with harsh sentences and
to reduce overcrowded prisons.
The first group of inmates from
around the nation will be
released between October 30
and November 1. More will
follow in the coming year.
Joining us now is Maurice
Chammah of The Marshall Project,
a nonprofit news site focused on
criminal justice issues.
Welcome to you.
So, first, tell us a little bit
about who these 6,000 prisoners
are. Why are they in
particular being released?
MAURICE CHAMMAH, The
Marshall Project: Sure.
So, these are all, according to
the Department of Justice,
low-level and nonviolent drug
offenders who went into the
system a number of years ago.
And then a year ago, the U.S.
Sentencing Commission, which is
an independent judicial
organization, set new sentencing
guidelines and made those
retroactive, which meant that
prisoners who were serving time
for drug crimes in the federal
system could apply for new
sentences to have their
sentences
reduced under the
new guidelines.
And it took about a year for the
DOJ to prepare and the Bureau of
Prisons to prepare to release
these prisoners, but they're all
coming at one time as sort of
the first wave of this,
and then over next year, a
little over 8,000 prisoners
stand to also be released. In
total,
it's been estimated that over
40,000 will be released
eventually.
JEFFREY BROWN: Forty
thousand in total.
But individuals, the process is
that they apply to it and they
get a yea or nay. And
what happens to
them upon release?
MAURICE CHAMMAH: Well, after
they apply to a judge, and the
judge, you know, working
with probation officers and
prosecutors, decides that
they're not going to be a
threat, they're
sent to halfway houses. Some of
them are on home confinement.
And then, eventually, they will
be released back into the
community.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, this is very
much part of a larger movement
to deal with mass incarceration,
right? And this is also very
much connected with changing
mandatory sentence guidelines.
MAURICE CHAMMAH: That's correct,
although this sort of sits
alongside those efforts.
It is kind of a major symbolic
moment, at the same time that
both the Senate and the
House are considering major
criminal justice reform bills,
which would change mandatory
minimum sentences, work to give
more resources for people coming
out of federal prisons,
and a variety of other kind
of reform initiatives.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Congress
looking at it, a number of
initiatives, and, interestingly
enough, bipartisan, right, to
bringing together a lot of folks
that often aren't together
on various issues.
MAURICE CHAMMAH: Right.
What's so interesting about this
is that it's coming at a moment
where increasingly over
the past several years
conservatives, kind of coming up
from a groundswell of kind of
mini-movements in Texas and
Utah, are saying that the
criminal justice system as it
stands
now represents a waste of money,
a waste of human potential.
And so you do see a lot of
Republicans whose predecessors
perhaps in the '80s and '90s,
like their fellow Democrats,
supported extremely, sort of
tough-on-crime, long sentences,
harsh
mandatory minimums. You're
seeing a really interesting kind
of bipartisan moment right
now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so you
have that on the one hand.
But are there also concerns? How
much concern do you hear about
the potential for a spike
in crime, say, upon the release
of all these prisoners?
MAURICE CHAMMAH: I think it's
going to be really interesting
in the coming days to see
what that concern looks like,
whether different voices in the
media bring it up.
Certainly, a year ago, when the
Sentencing Commission made this
decision to allow these
prisoners to be released,
Senator Chuck Grassley, who
heads up the Senate Judiciary
Committee,
expressed concern that murderers
and robbers would be let back
out onto the streets. He
hasn't spoken yet about this
group of 6,000, but it stands to
reason that there is a camp,
particularly with some in the
Republican Party, though perhaps
not exclusively, who are going
to raise a concern.
And there is not yet really
proof whether these people are
going to represent a danger,
though it should be kind of
mentioned in this context that,
every year, that the federal
government and the states
release hundreds of thousands of
prisoners, and it's not
necessarily
the case that this group of
6,000 are sort of more or less
dangerous than the larger
group.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you're saying
this will be a potential test
case for recidivism rates
for released prisoners, clearly.
MAURICE CHAMMAH: Absolutely, a
test case for that, and also
just a test case for the sort
of political
appetite for reform.
JEFFREY BROWN: And this is still
a relatively small number of
prisoners, right? We're talking
about a very large
problem in the country.
MAURICE CHAMMAH:
Correct. Correct.
If you see, you know,
overincarceration as a problem,
which many increasingly do, this
group of 6,000 prisoners is kind
of a drop in the bucket. Even
the 40,000 prisoners who
stand to eventually get out from
this sort of small political
movement, you know, are
sort of, again, a very small
portion of the 2.2 million
people who are in prisons and
jails around the U.S.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Maurice Chammah of The Marshall
Project, thanks so much.
MAURICE CHAMMAH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": Ann
Romney on her battle with M.S.
and the race for the
White House; a conversation with
the Dalai Lama on his mission to
find peace; and what
makes "Over the Rainbow"
a classic tune.
But, first, Donald Trump said
today he is not getting out of
the Republican race for
president, despite having said
this weekend he would bow out if
his numbers dropped.
While some expected him to fade,
Trump continues to roll -- poll,
that is, in the high double
digits, followed by Ben Carson
and Carly Fiorina, two others
who have never held elected
office.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins looks at what is
driving all this.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: Right now, and you
know it...
LISA DESJARDINS: Donald Trump is
both famous and famously direct.
DONALD TRUMP: We have illegal
immigrants that are treated
better by far than our veterans.
LISA DESJARDINS: But he has been
propelled by what may be the
least known, least understood
group of voters in the 2016
race. Their overall feelings are
clear: anger, fear and distrust.
Steve Carby is a small business
man. You see him here defending
Donald Trump to protesters.
He's worried about veterans, and
he likes Trump's directness.
STEVE CARBY, Trump Supporter:
One of the main reasons that I
find him attractive as far
as someone who would represent
me is because he says what he
wants to say, and the other
thing is, is that I don't
think he can be bought.
LISA DESJARDINS: Stay-at-home
mom of two Amanda Mancini, she
is worried about her kids'
future.
AMANDA MANCINI, Trump Supporter:
I'm very concerned about his
education. He's in public
school, but only because, you
know, we can only afford for one
child to go to private
school. But I see the stuff that
he brings home with the Common
Core. It makes no sense.
LISA DESJARDINS: These are
conservative issues, but, most
importantly, these voters are
against
the establishment, including
the Republican establishment.
Salon and spa owner Elaine
Yoachum is angry at the GOP
leadership.
ELAINE YOACHUM, Trump Supporter:
I have voted for Republicans for
the last 20 years, and
I'm feeling like I have kind of
wasted my time and my vote. When
I heard Trump speak,
I thought, this is somebody that
can be a leader and change the
Republican Party.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is key to
Trump's strength. In a national
FOX News poll out last week,
26 percent of likely Republican
voters backed him, eight points
ahead of anyone else.
But look at what else Republican
voters felt in that poll. Sixty
percent of them said their
party has betrayed them.
DONALD TRUMP: They will never
make America great again.
LISA DESJARDINS: Enter
Trump's outsider appeal.
DONALD TRUMP: They're controlled
fully by the lobbyists, by the
donors.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's an
appeal not everyone buys.
DAVID MCINTOSH, President, Club
for Growth: He's not really the
outsider we think he is.
He's more like the typical
politician, where he is telling
us what we want to hear, but
reality is he would be very
different if he were ever in
office.
LISA DESJARDINS: David McIntosh
heads the conservative advocacy
group Club for Growth,
which focuses on fiscal
policies, low taxes, small
government. The Club has
attacked current
Republican leaders like House
Speaker John Boehner, and they
see Trump as worse. They're
running this $1 million
ad campaign against him.
NARRATOR: Trump wants us to
think he's Mr. Tell It Like It
Is, but he has a record, and
it's very liberal.
DAVID MCINTOSH: He's been for
frequent tax increases. He's not
for free trade. He supported
the single-payer health care
system, government-run health
care. Those are not
conservative, free
market policies.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump
denies that he's liberal.
DONALD TRUMP: I will be totally
pledging my allegiance to the
Republican Party and the
conservative principles
for which it stand.
LISA DESJARDINS: Despite his
critics, for the past month,
Trump has mostly held an eight-
to 10-point lead nationally. Can
anything put a dent in that?
Well, polls do show some
potential red flags on
personality and ability. In a
USA Today
survey, the top five words
American voters used to describe
Donald Trump were all negative,
including idiot, arrogant and
selfish. The top word for
Republican voters was arrogant.
But countering that, Trump may
also be riding an historic wave.
BEVERLY GAGE, Professor, Yale
University: One of the really
remarkable things that you're
seeing in the United States
right now are genuinely high
levels of immigration, at a
level we really haven't seen
since the turn of the 20th
century.
LISA DESJARDINS: Beverly Gage,
Yale University history
professor, says times like
these,
with nearly 15 percent of the
population being foreign-born,
spark movements.
BEVERLY GAGE: You also usually
see accompanying these kind of
heightened periods of
immigration
is a kind of backlash politics
that argues that immigrants
shouldn't be here in the United
States, that they're taking
Americans' jobs. And depending
on, you know, who you're talking
about and at what moment,
that takes different shapes.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump voters,
including Mexican immigrant
Zander Saenz, say this is why
they
are sticking with Trump.
ZANDER SAENZ, Trump Supporter: I
believe that Mexico has taken
advantage of the United States
through immigration. The elites
in Mexico, I agree with Donald
Trump, that they don't
want the poor in Mexico. They
want to bring them over to
America.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
make our country so great.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's a push for
new direction, new leadership, a
push also helping Carly
Fiorina, who is quickly rising
in the polls, and Ben Carson,
who is getting within reach
of Trump nationally, the three
GOP front-runners, who are also
the only three candidates who
have never held office before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa
Desjardins joins me now.
So, Lisa, it is a phenomenon out
there with Donald Trump. But
where is the race right
now with Trump, with Carson,
with Fiorina, all three
outsiders, as you point out?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And you can pick any one poll
you like, but if you look at the
trend, Judy, over the last
month, what has happened is,
Trump has basically plateaued.
He's stayed steady. He's dipped
a little bit in Iowa, but,
overall, he has stayed about the
same.
Carson and Fiorina are on the
rise as a whole, and Fiorina
especially, Judy. We have really
seen her go from the back of the
pack, not just to up close to
the front, but third and
in some polls even
second in the race.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Can you tell if
this is because of something
Donald Trump is doing or is it
something because of
Carson and Fiorina?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, we know
that Trump's unfavorability
rating is relatively high to
theirs, that Carson and Fiorina
have higher favorability.
They're more well-liked than
Trump.
Now, those who support Trump
love him, but there is a large
group that doesn't. And a
problem for Trump going down the
road, Judy, is that 47 percent
of GOP voters say they
are willing to consider him.
That means more than half who
say they're not even willing
to consider Donald Trump. That's
a problem for the future. It's
not a problem that Carson
or Fiorina have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do we have any
way of quantifying how many
voters are paying attention at
this
point, Republican or Democrat?
LISA DESJARDINS: To be honest,
no, because these polls ask
people, are you a likely
Republican
voter, are you a likely
caucus-goer? We're not asking
them -- or no one is asking
them,
how much are you paying
attention? How much do you know
about these candidates?
So, to some degree, this might
be name recognition, and it
might be buzz.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is --
as we said, it's a phenomenon.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we
keep on watching it.
Lisa Desjardins, we thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now another
addition to our "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
Some have called it a storybook
life, married to her teenage
sweetheart, mother of five
children, financially secure
with a loving, supportive
husband.
But, in 1997, Ann Romney was
diagnosed with multiple
sclerosis, an autoimmune disease
which cannot be cured, but can
be treated. Now she has written
a memoir, "In This Together:
My Story," her account of the
journey she has traveled these
last 18 years.
Welcome, Ann Romney.
ANN ROMNEY, Author, "In This
Together: My Story": Thank you
so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is a very
personal story. It's, in fact,
remarkably personal for someone
who has been so much
in the public eye.
ANN ROMNEY: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
hard was it to write?
ANN ROMNEY: Well, it was hard,
because it was -- I had to go
back to those very dark
days, which was, not -- it's not
like I felt proud of myself, how
depressed I was and how
sorry I felt for myself.
But I knew it was important, and
I wanted to share this story, so
I wanted to -- I deliberately
made it personal, so that people
would know that I was opening my
heart to them and that
I was sharing with them where I
was and where I have come since
then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you go in
knowing you wanted to be really
candid? Because you are candid
in here.
ANN ROMNEY: You know, they're --
I did. I wanted to be candid. It
was very deliberate.
And then, when I had written a
lot of it, the publisher came
back and they said, we
want more. And so I brought out
a few more stories that I
wouldn't really have shared.
It was hard in some ways, but
then also so honest, and I
wanted to be that way, so that
people can honestly know that I
am here to try to help people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it really
is your journey from the
diagnosis, what, 18 years ago
through
various therapies. You seem
to be doing very well.
But what's been the
hardest part of this?
ANN ROMNEY: I think the hardest
part was initially, when I was
first diagnosed. And then I was
so sick that it stripped
me from my identity.
And how it did that was that I
think we identify ourselves by
labels or things that we are
able to do: I am this. I am a
good cook. I am a good mother. I
am a good this. I am a
good doctor. I am a good lawyer.
When you can't do those things
anymore, you wonder where your
identity is. And I think,
for me, it was going to places
where I was uncomfortable going
and being stripped down,
so that I was really vulnerable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you are
open about the treatments you
have tried, everything from
chemotherapy, horseback riding
therapy, something called
reflexology, your faith.
What is your view of
alternative medicine?
ANN ROMNEY: Well, I like to tell
people, when they get a
diagnosis like, this, of course,
go to the Western treatment,
and especially with M.S.
It's very important that people
get aggressive and early
treatment. This is different
than
what it was when I was first
diagnosed, where they said wait
until you're much sicker to
get treatment. But now we know,
get aggressive treatment from
the very beginning.
But after that, you know, the
sad thing is, you still don't
feel well. You still have
symptoms of fatigue and all
these things, that it's just
unrelenting and very
debilitating.
And I found that reflexology
worked for me. I found that
riding horses worked for me.
Finding joy in your life is
another really important
component. And losing yourself
in
doing something else, and not
always dwelling on your illness
is very important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's a lot in
here that's really
inspirational.
And I have to ask you a little
bit about politics. You said
after the campaign of 2012 that
you
felt terrible for what
America had lost.
ANN ROMNEY: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was
right after the election.
How do you feel about how
things are going today?
ANN ROMNEY: Well,
it's frustrating.
You know, we can see that it
looks like there is an economic
recovery. And, at the same
time, that recovery has left out
the middle class and millions of
Americans. And so we
still have so many problems. We
look at internationally. What is
happening in the Middle East is
just
-- is heart-wrenching and
devastating. And you think of
the hundreds of thousands of
Syrian refugees and all the
problems that are happening in
the world.
And it is frustrating for me to
watch this, because I feel as
though Mitt would have been
a very good president. And I
said, it's not our loss, because
our lives are fine, but
the country lost by not
having Mitt as president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you did give
some thought, both of you, to
running this time, decided...
ANN ROMNEY: For
about 20 seconds.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
you decided not to.
But we now have a contest on the
Republican side where it seems
people with no government
experience are more favored than
anybody else. Do you think
that's healthy?
ANN ROMNEY: Well, I think it's a
reflection of a sentiment, and
I'm not sure it's where
we will end up.
There's a lot of ups and downs
in a campaign, but I think it's
a reflection. And if you
look at both the Democratic
contest and the Republican
contest, the same thing is
happening,
where people are -- I think feel
-- I think the voters feel
disenfranchised.
I think they feel like things go
on in Washington without the
best interest of the American
-- that -- the public being put
first. I think they're right. I
think government has been
run for a long time by special
interests, and listening to the
lobbyists. And I think
people are really
frustrated with that.
So, I think the sentiment is not
only out there. I think it's
real, and I think that
politicians are better --
obviously, they're turning to
people outside of the norm to
say,
you go in there with a wrecking
ball and just -- just smash it
all to pieces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
ANN ROMNEY: And I think
that's their sentiment.
I think, at the end of the day,
they will come to and coalesce
around a candidate that
will be able to unify and also
respond to some of this
sentiment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But maybe not
where they are right now?
ANN ROMNEY: I don't think they
will be where they are right
now. I think they will come
and try to find someone maybe
with a little -- a little
experience.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I just have to
ask you one other question.
And that is a story in The Wall
Street Journal today, front
page, about the cost of
prescription
drugs. And they single out drugs
for multiple sclerosis, and they
talk about, in the last,
I think, decade, drugs went up
an average of 16 percent a year
each year over the last
decade.
ANN ROMNEY: Yes.
It's -- it's...
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
does that say?
ANN ROMNEY: Well, it's -- we all
know that the drug companies are
responsible for a lot
of the research.
And we know that it is extremely
expensive for them to do that,
and it costs a lot of
money for them to do it. But we
also know that, once they get an
exclusive use of a
certain drug, that they do seem
to take a bit of advantage of
that.
So, there has to be a
recognition that we need that.
We need the drug companies
spending
that money and doing that
research. We also need them to
be responsible for not hurting
people that are desperate
for some of these drugs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's been a
pleasure talking with you, Ann
Romney.
The book is "In This
Together: My Story."
Thank you very much.
ANN ROMNEY: Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Pope Francis
visited the East Coast a few
weeks back, another world
religious figure, the Dalai
Lama, was in Minnesota, where
doctors at the Mayo Clinic
advised him
to cut short his own
tour of the U.S.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro recently sat down
with the spiritual leader of
Tibetan
Buddhism at his exile
home in India.
A version of this story aired on
the PBS program "Religion &
Ethics Newsweekly."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Until
doctors recently told him to
slow down, the 80-year-old Dalai
Lama had kept a breathless pace.
In just a few weeks last summer,
he was at a music festival
in England, a presidential
library in Houston, and a
sold-out stadium near Los
Angeles.
There is perhaps no world figure
today with a more diverse face
of fans.
Why are you so popular globally?
Why are you a rock star?
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA,
Leader of Tibetan Buddhism: I
don't know. I never pay
attention
about that, why people
praise me, why, why.
CROWD (singing): Happy birthday
to you. Happy birthday.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And he said
he's not concerned about another
matter that is many minds, who
will succeed him, or, as he's
increasingly said in recent
years, whether anyone will.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA:
Many people showing interest
about the institution of Dalai
Lama.
For me, not much interest.
(LAUGHTER)
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That's
significant. Like the familiar
laugh, his role as Dalai Lama
-- the world's best known
Buddhist leader -- has been
central to who he is, the
reincarnation
of Dalai Lamas going back six
centuries, leader of a fabled
once-upon-a-time country high
in the Himalayas.
He fled with U.S. help to India
in 1959 after a failed uprising
against Tibet's annexation
by Mao Zedong's revolutionary
People's Republic of China.
Today, at his home base in
Dharamsala, India, he still
keeps a full schedule. It begins
early each morning as a diverse
crowd lines up for a chance to
meet him.
Many are from the tens of
thousands of Tibetans who
followed him and settled in
India, where
the Dalai Lama set up a secular
Tibetan government in exile and
later took on a mostly
ceremonial
role.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA: You
see, in 2011, I totally retired,
now no connection with
political responsibility.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says he's
now focused on his moral
responsibility as an advocate
for world peace, one that's won
him numerous awards, including
the Nobel Peace Prize.
A prolific lecturer, he says
that peace must start with the
individual, with compassion
for one's fellow human beings.
It's a message that he says
isn't uniquely Buddhist.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA: All
major religions teach the
practice of compassion, love,
forgiveness,
tolerance.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He wants to
see ethics common to all
religions taught in schools,
because he says religious
leaders have too often focused
on excludes and division,
leading
to both conflict and growing
inequality, between and within
societies.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA:
Like America, a very rich
country, but many people poor,
and then India and China now
developing great potential, like
Africa also, a lot of potential.
But I think this lack of moral
principle, in that respect, I
think, you see, we need
some sort of lesson,
education about socialism.
(LAUGHTER)
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA: I
am socialist. And then,
furthermore, as far as social
economy
theory concerned, I am Marxist.
I am Buddhist Marxist.
(LAUGHTER)
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says
materialism and consumerism have
prevailed, even in places
where political leaders pledge
themselves to Marxist or
socialist ideals.
The most prominent example is
China, he said, now trying to
regain its moral compass. Its
leader, Xi Jinping, recently
acknowledged a role for its
religious traditions, including
Buddhism.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA:
It's unthinkable, a communist,
atheist, you see, leader of that
express publicly importance of
Buddhism, is something quite
unique. So this, I think the
reality now shows just the
material development alone will
not get satisfaction to the
public,
to the people.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: While the
Chinese government and Communist
Party have called for more
tolerance
and religious freedom, they have
condemned the Dalai Lama as a
separatist and a puppet
of the West.
With China's prominence in
global trade as the world's
second largest economy, many
Western
nations have become more muted
in their support of the Dalai
Lama. For his part, the exiled
leader, while alleging human
rights abuses and the
destruction of Tibetan culture
in
his homeland, has
moderated his demands.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA: We
are seeking genuine autonomy,
not seeking independence.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But he's
drawn a line in the sand on one
issue, China's insistence
that the government approve
the next Dalai Lama.
The anointing can take years
after the Dalai Lama's death, in
which monks look for
supernatural
signs to lead them to the young
boy who is the reincarnation.
The current Dalai Lama,
born of simple peasant stock as
Tenzin Gyatso, was identified at
age 3 and installed at 15
after years of rigorous study.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA: As
far as 1969 I publicly stated
this institution, whether
should continue or not,
entirely up to Tibetan people.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In the
modern age, when democratic
governance and Buddhist
scholarship
are much more accessible, he
says he's not sure there's a
need for a new Dalai Lama.
When he turns 90, he says, he
will consult on the question
with religious elders and
the Tibetan people, before
deciding whether to be
reincarnated, like his
predecessors,
or to end the tradition.
For now, it's a decision that
this very public figure says is
very private.
HIS HOLINESS THE DALAI LAMA:
These inner values and world
peace and a happy world, this is
our common responsibility. About
next life is individual
business. Our concept of God,
concept of nirvana, concept of
next life is private business.
(LAUGHTER)
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this is Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Dharamsala,
India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
"Over the Rainbow," the classic
ballad written by Harold
Arlen and E.Y. Harburg, and made
famous by Judy Garland in "The
Wizard of Oz."
Tomorrow marks the anniversary
of its first recording back in
1938.
And Jeffrey Brown joined
composer and musician Rob
Kapilow recently at the
Signature Theatre
in Arlington, Virginia, to
look at why the song endures.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Over the
Rainbow," right, one of the most
-- everybody knows this song,
but why? What makes
us know this song?
ROB KAPILOW, Composer: You know,
amazingly, the answer to that
starts with the very first
two notes. In this famous
opening idea, there's really
only two ideas. One of them, I
call
leap. The other one, I call
circle and yearn. And it's
important.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Leap
and circle and yearn.
ROB KAPILOW: It's important you
learn these technical terms,
Jeffrey.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oh, I see.
ROB KAPILOW: Circle and yearn.
So, it starts off with this.
JEFFREY BROWN: I didn't learn
that with piano lessons, by the
way, right?
ROB KAPILOW: It's time.
We start off with this big leap.
This is a full octave leap.
That's a big leap for a
popular song. In fact, producers
were worried that nobody would
buy the song because it
would be too hard to
sing this opening leap.
Now, this leap isn't just a big
leap musically. It's a leap
between two different worlds and
two parts of the voice. The
first note is kind of low down
there in chest voice. It's
Dorothy's troubled reality. It's
Kansas, aridity, no flowers.
It's the black and white of the
beginning of the film.
JUDY GARLAND, Actress: Someplace
where there isn't any trouble.
Do you suppose there is
such a place, Toto?
ROB KAPILOW: So, this is Kansas.
The upper note, it is more
ethereal. It's like -- it's
where she wants to escape to.
It's Oz. It's over the rainbow.
So, these two notes, Kansas and
Oz, are going to turn out to be
the key to the whole song,
but you won't get their final
meaning until the last notes of
the song.
JUDY GARLAND (singing):
Somewhere over the rainbow, way
up high, there's a land that
I heard of once in a lullaby.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you're
saying through two notes?
ROB KAPILOW: Through two notes.
And now watch what happens.
The only other idea is circle
and yearn. So, you start on a
note, you circle back to it,
and then you yearn. That's it,
circle and yearn. Now, there are
three...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: And the question
is, what are we -- what is she
warning for? And at the
end, we realize, right?
ROB KAPILOW: Yes, exactly. She's
yearning for high C. She's
yearning for high C.
So, look, there's three leaps.
First one is big on "somewhere."
Next one is smaller on
"way up." Third one is lower and
even smaller, "there's a," OK,
so three leaps. Like her
leaps, her world is contracting.
Now, it's really the harmony
that makes it so exquisite. You
know, Yip Harburg called
this song of yearning. So,
here's what she's yearning
about. He could easily have
written
kind of a cheery accompaniment
to "way up high," like this.
(singing): Way up high.
But listen to the yearning in
the piano part here. I mean, it
doesn't get more beautiful.
That's why we're still listening
into it today, those beautiful
chords. Then, it's so subtle.
He could have written this for
"there's a," but listen to the
one dark chord.
And then we finish with two
circle and yearns, circle,
yearn, circle and yearn.
Now, why is that so fantastic?
Why does it hold together? Well,
really, what we have
done, remember, Kansas, Oz. He
really takes it back from Oz
back to Kansas in a simple
scale.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROB KAPILOW: But he does it like
this. So, we yearn for Oz. We're
stuck in Kansas.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. But the
circle, it occurs to me as
you're doing this, is to end up
back
at home.
ROB KAPILOW: To end
up back at home.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, that's -- the
theme of the film that we all
remember is there embedded
in the music.
ROB KAPILOW: It is.
But when she comes back the
home, she understands home in a
completely different way. And
that's
what makes the ending of the
song so magical, because, we do
the second verse, we're still
stuck in Kansas, "dreams really
do come true." We have a
beautiful middle. We don't have
to talk about it.
We come back and do it a third
time, same music. And the song
should have finished at,
"Why, then, oh, then why can't
I?" But there would have been no
transformation.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROB KAPILOW: She would have been
home, but she would never have
gone to Oz.
In a beautiful moment -- and
this is a fantastic moment --
Arlen decides to bring back the
middle of the song, but in the
orchestra. There's a beautiful
quote from Yip Harburg,
who wrote the words. He said:
"Words make you think thoughts,
music makes you feel a
feeling, but a song makes
you feel a thought."
And you can feel her thinking.
Just the orchestra. Then she
comes back, just like in the B
section,
"if happy little
blue birds fly."
JUDY GARLAND (singing): If happy
little blue birds fly beyond the
rainbow, why, oh, why
can't I?
ROB KAPILOW: If it had copied
the middle, it would have gone
like this. But, instead,
he changes it, "beyond the
rainbow." She has one last rise.
Now, remember, Kansas,
Oz, Kansas, Oz.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
ROB KAPILOW: One last rise.
"Why, oh, why," and where does
she finally get to? Oz. From
low C to high C, from Kansas to
Oz, from reality to fantasy, and
her transformation is complete.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Over
the Rainbow."
Rob Kapilow, thank you so much.
ROB KAPILOW: A
pleasure. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I love
that song. Thank you, Jeff.
Online, we want to tell you, as
the House of Representatives
holds a rare mid-session
vote for a new speaker, our
politics team decided to put
together a quiz to see how
well you know the House. You can
find that, and sign up for our
politics newsletter, on
our home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in tonight on "Charlie
Rose": former Fed Chairman Ben
Bernanke with an insider's
view of the financial crisis.
And we will be talking to him
right here on Thursday.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, Gwen sits down
with Bill and Melinda Gates, and
I'm heading to Iowa to
interview Hillary Clinton.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and right here
again tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.